Plaster cast versus functional brace for non-surgical treatment of Achilles
tendon rupture (UKSTAR): a multicentre randomised controlled trial and economic
evaluation Matthew L Costa, Juul Achten, Ioana R Marian, Susan J Dutton, Sarah E
Lamb, Benjamin Ollivere, Mandy Maredza, Stavros Petrou, Rebecca S Kearney, on
behalf of the UKSTAR trial collaborators* Summary Background Patients with
Achilles tendon rupture who have non-operative treatment have traditionally been
treated with immobilisation of the tendon in plaster casts for several weeks.
Functional bracing is an alternative non-operative treatment that allows earlier
mobilisation, but evidence on its effectiveness and safety is scarce. The aim of
the UKSTAR trial was to compare functional and quality-of-life outcomes and
resource use in patients treated non- operatively with plaster cast versus
functional brace. Methods UKSTAR was a pragmatic, superiority, multicentre,
randomised controlled trial done at 39 hospitals in the UK. Patients (aged ≥16
years) who were being treated non-operatively for a primary Achilles tendon
rupture at the participating centres were potentially eligible. The exclusion
criteria were presenting more than 14 days after injury, previous rupture of the
same Achilles tendon, or being unable to complete the questionnaires. Eligible
participants were randomly assigned (1:1) to receive a plaster cast or
functional brace using a centralised web-based system. Because the interventions
were clearly visible, neither patients nor clinicians could be masked.
Participants wore the intervention for 8 weeks. The primary outcome was
patient-reported Achilles tendon rupture score (ATRS) at 9 months, analysed in
the modified intention-to-treat population (all patients in the groups to which
they were allocated, excluding participants who withdrew or died before
providing any outcome data). The main safety outcome was the incidence of tendon
re-rupture. Resource use was recorded from a health and personal social care
perspective. The trial is registered with ISRCTN, ISRCTN62639639. Findings
Between Aug 15, 2016, and May 31, 2018, 1451 patients were screened, of whom 540
participants (mean age 48·7 years, 79% male) were randomly allocated to receive
plaster cast (n=266) or functional brace (n=274). 527 (98%) of 540 were included
in the modified intention-to-treat population, and 13 (2%) were excluded because
they withdrew or died before providing any outcome data. There was no difference
in ATRS at 9 months post injury (cast group n=244, mean ATRS 74∙4 [SD 19∙8];
functional brace group n=259, ATRS 72∙8 [20∙4]; adjusted mean difference –1∙38
[95% CI –4∙9 to 2∙1], p=0·44). There was no difference in the rate of re-rupture
of the tendon (17 [6%] of 266 in the plaster cast group vs 13 [5%] of 274 in the
functional brace group, p=0·40). The mean total health and personal social care
cost was £1181 for the plaster cast group and £1078 for the functional bract
group (mean between-group difference –£103 [95% CI –289 to 84]). Interpretation
Traditional plaster casting was not found to be superior to early weight-bearing
in a functional brace, as measured by ATRS, in the management of patients
treated non-surgically for Achilles tendon rupture. Clinicians may consider the
use of early weight-bearing in a functional brace as a safe and cost-effective
alternative to plaster casting. Funding UK National Institute for Health
Research Health Technology Assessment Programme. Copyright © 2020 The
Author(s). Published by Elsevier Ltd. This is an Open Access article under the
CC BY 4.0 license. Introduction Rupture of the Achilles tendon is an
increasingly common injury in both the sporting and non-sporting populations,
leading to a prolonged period away from work and social activities.1 The most
recent trials comparing surgical repair with non-operative treatment have found
no dif erence in functional outcome; therefore, non-operative treatment is
increasingly preferred by clinicians and patients.2–4 Traditionally, patients
with an Achilles rupture have been treated with serial plaster casts over
several weeks. The cast provides maximum protection for the tendon as it heals,
but immobilisation might increase calf muscle atrophy, ankle joint stifness,
gait abnormalities, and the risk of blood clots.5–7 Functional bracing is an
alternative treatment in which the patient’s lower leg is placed into a
removable walking boot which contains wedges to lift up the heel. The brace
allows the patient to put weight through their leg as they walk and can be
removed to allow movement at the ankle joint. However, evidence is scarce on how
functional bracing afects overall recovery and whether it is associated with an
increased risk of re-rupture of the tendon.8 www.thelancet.com Vol 395 February
8, 2020 Articles Lancet 2020; 395: 441–48 See Comment page 397 *UKSTAR trial
collaborators are listed at the end of the Article Oxford Trauma (Prof M L Costa
PhD, J Achten PhD, Prof S E Lamb PhD) and Oxford Clinical Trials Research Unit,
Centre for Statistics in Medicine (I R Marian MSc, S J Dutton MSc), Nuffield
Department of Rheumatology, Musculoskeletal and Orthopaedic Sciences, University
of Oxford, Oxford, UK; College of Medicine and Health, University of Exeter,
Exeter, UK (Prof S E Lamb); Division of Rheumatology, Orthopaedics and
Dermatology, School of Medicine, University of Nottingham, Nottingham, UK (B
Ollivere MD); Warwick Clinical Trials Unit, University of Warwick, Coventry, UK
(M Maredza PhD, Prof S Petrou PhD, R S Kearney PhD); and Nuffield Department of
Primary Care Health Sciences, University of Oxford, Oxford, UK (Prof S Petrou)
Correspondence to: Prof Matthew Costa, Oxford Trauma, Nuffield Department of
Rheumatology, Musculoskeletal and Orthopaedic Sciences, University of Oxford,
Oxford OX3 9DU, UK matthew.costa@ndorms.ox. ac.uk 441 Articles Research in
context Evidence before this study In the past 10 years, trials comparing
surgical repair with non -surgical treatment for patients with a rupture of the
Achilles tendon have found no evidence of a difference in funct ional outcome;
therefore, non-surgical treatment is increasingly preferred. However, before
this study, little evidence was available on the best type of non-surgical
treatment. Traditionally, patients have been treated in plaster casts to
immobilise the foot and ankle while the tendon heals. However, this approach has
an immediate effect on mobility for a period of around eight weeks, affecting
activities of daily life. Prolonged immobilisation is associated with risk of
muscle atrophy, deep vein thrombosis, and joint stiffness. In addition, it has
potential long-term consequences, including prolonged gait abnormalities,
persistent calf muscle weakness, and an inability to return to previous activity
levels. Functional bracing, involving immediate, protected weight-bearing in a
brace, was designed to address these issues. However, before the UKSTAR trial,
little evidence regarding its effectiveness was available, and some clinicians
had concerns about safety, in particular the risk of re-rupture of the tendon.
In guidelines published in 2009, the American Academy of Orthopaedic Surgeons
(AAOS) stated that it was unable to recommend for or against the use of
functional bracing for patients with Achilles tendon rupture treated
non-operatively. We updated this evidence synthesis in 2019 by doing a
literature search of The objective of the UKSTAR trial was to compare function
and pain, quality of life, complications (including re-rupture), and resource
use in patients having non- operative treatment for an acute Achilles tendon
rupture, treated with plaster cast versus functional bracing. Methods Study
design UKSTAR was a pragmatic, superiority, multicentre, randomised controlled
trial done at 39 National Health Service (NHS) hospitals in the UK. The study
was given a favourable Research Ethics opinion by the Oxford B Research Ethics
Committee on April 7, 2016 (reference 16/SC/0109) and each recruitment centre
was granted site-specific approval from its NHS Trust Research and Development
department before trial commence­ ment. The detailed protocol and statistical
analysis plan have been published previously.9,10 Participants All patients aged
16 years or older who presented at the trial centres with a primary (first-time)
rupture of the Achilles tendon were screened. The patient, in con­ junction with
their surgeon, decided whether non-surgical treatment was appropriate, as per
normal clinical practice. If patients decided not to have surgery, they were
potentially eligible to take part in the trial. Patients were excluded 442
MEDLINE and Embase with the terms “Achilles tendon” AND “rupture” for articles
published in English from 2009 (date of the AAOS guidelines) to October, 2019.
To our knowledge, the only trials published to date have been single-centre
studies with small patient numbers and inconclusive findings. Added value of
this study In the UKSTAR trial, 540 adult participants at 39 hospitals in the UK
were randomly assigned to either plaster cast or functional brace for
non-surgical treatment of an Achilles tendon rupture. The study found no
evidence that traditional plaster casting is superior to early weight-bearing in
a functional brace as measured by Achilles tendon rupture score. The results
also showed no evidence of a difference in the rate of re-rupture of the tendon.
A health economic analysis indicated that functional bracing is likely to be
cost-effective. Implications of all the available evidence Rupture of the
Achilles tendon is a serious and increasingly common injury. In keeping with the
latest evidence, patients are increasingly choosing to have their tendon treated
non-surgically. However, to date, little evidence was available on the best type
of non-surgical treatment. The findings of the UKSTAR trial will assist patients
and clinicians in choosing the most suitable non-surgical treatment.
Furthermore, policy makers will note that the health economic evaluation
indicates that functional bracing is likely to be cost-effective. if they
presented more than 14 days after their injury, had experienced a previous
rupture of the same Achilles tendon, or were unable to complete questionnaires.
Eligible patients were provided with the trial information verbally and in
writing. When the patient had considered the trial information, informed written
consent was obtained by a trained member of the research team. Randomisation and
masking Participants were randomly allocated (1:1) to either functional bracing
or plaster cast using a computer-generated allocation sequence stratified by
recruitment centre via a secure, centralised web-based randomisation service.
The sequence was prepared by the trial statistician. Stratifi­ cation by
recruitment centre helped to ensure any cluster efect related to the recruitment
centre itself was equally distributed in the trial groups. A local research
associate informed the treating clinical team of the allocated treatment.
Because the interventions were clearly visible, neither patients nor clinicians
could be masked. Procedures The interventions were chosen on the basis of a
systematic review of the literature and a survey of current UK clinical
practice; plaster casting is the most common treatment, and rigid braces are
used more commonly www.thelancet.com Vol 395 February 8, 2020 than flexible
orthotics.4,8 Images of the two treatments are provided in the appendix (p 2).
Participants who were randomly allocated to the plaster cast group had a
below-knee plaster cast applied in the gravity equinus position (ie, the
position that the foot naturally adopts when unsupported, with the toes pointing
down towards the floor). Over the first 8 weeks, the participants returned to
the hospital (the frequency of visits was decided by the clinical team at that
hospital) and the position of the plaster cast was gradually changed until the
foot was in a plantigrade position (ie, the foot was flat to the floor). At this
point, usually 6 weeks after the first cast was applied, the patient was
permitted to start fully weight-bearing in the plaster cast. The cast was
removed at 8 weeks. Participants who were randomly allocated to the functional
brace group had a removable, rigid walking boot. Initially, two solid heel
wedges (or equivalent) were inserted inside the brace to replicate the gravity
equinus position of the foot.11 However, because the bottom of the brace was
flat to the floor, the participant was able to mobilise with their full weight
on their foot immediately after fitting. The brace also permitted some movement
at the ankle joint. The number of wedges and foot position were reduced over 8
weeks until the foot reached a plantigrade position. The brace was removed at 8
weeks. At 8 weeks, all participants were provided with the same standardised,
written physiotherapy advice detailing the exercises they needed to perform for
rehabilitation (appendix p 1). This standardised rehabilitation advice was based
on a pub­ lished systematic review of rehabilitation protocols and refined
through a previous feasibility trial.8 All par­ ticipants were advised to move
their toes, ankle joint, and knee joint fully within the limits of their
comfort, and walking was encouraged. In this pragmatic trial, any other
rehabilitation input beyond the written physiotherapy advice (including a formal
referral to physiotherapy) was recorded but left to the discretion of the
treating clinicians, as per their normal clinical practice. Patients were
assessed for outcomes at 8 weeks and followed up at 3, 6, and 9 months from
randomisation. All primary and secondary outcomes were assessed at all visits.
Outcomes The primary outcome was Achilles tendon rupture score (ATRS) at 9
months.12 ATRS is patient-reported and consists of 10 items that assess
symptoms, physical activity, and pain related to the Achilles tendon to give a
score between 0 and 100, with 100 as the best possible score. The secondary
outcomes were ATRS at other timepoints, health-related quality of life (measured
by EQ-5D-5L),13 and complications (tendon re-rupture, deep vein thrombosis,
pulmonary embolism, fall with no injury, fall with injury, pain under the heel,
numbness around the foot, and pressure sores). www.thelancet.com Vol 395
February 8, 2020 Statistical and health economic analysis The minimum clinically
important diference (MCID) for the primary outcome ATRS was 8 points. At an
individual patient level, a diference of 8 points represents the ability to walk
upstairs or run with some difficulty versus with great difficulty. At the
population level, 8 points represents the diference between a healthy patient
and a patient with a minor disability.14 In our pilot work, the standard
deviation of the ATRS at 9 months post injury was 20 points.15 Assuming a likely
population variability of 20, MCID value of 8, 90% power to detect the selected
MCID, and a 5% type 1 error rate on a two-sided test, we required 264 total
participants to be randomised. Allowing a margin of 20% loss of primary outcome
data to include patients who would cross over between interventions or be lost
to follow-up, we required a minimum of 330 participants. Recruitment was faster
than anticipated, and, with the approval of the Research Ethics Committee, we
were able to exceed the minimum number of participants required in the sample
size calculation to obtain a more precise estimate of the number of
complications. The primary outcome of ATRS at 9 months was analysed in a
modified intention-to-treat population. We also considered the complier average
causal efect (CACE) population to account for compliance with treatment.16 The
modified intention-to-treat population included all participants in their
randomised groups, excluding participants who had missing data at baseline, or
who withdrew or died before providing any outcome data. The CACE population
included all randomised participants who were compliant with treatment.
Participants were considered compliant with the intervention if they wore their
allocated treatment for a period of 6 weeks or more without any change of
treatment within this period. We used a linear mixed efects regression model,
adjusting for age, gender, and baseline ATRS as fixed efects, and recruitment
centre and repeated measures within participants as random efects. Secondary
outcomes were analysed in the modified intention-to-treat population, with use
of similar methods adjusting for the relevant baseline covariate if applicable.
Complications were analysed using χ² or Fisher’s exact test in the
intention-to-treat population. Sensitivity analyses to examine the robustness of
conclusions to diferent assumptions were done in the CACE population. All
analyses were done using Stata version 15.0 (StataCorp, College Station, TX,
USA). The health economic evaluation adopted an NHS and personal social services
perspective, in accordance with UK National Institute for Health and Care
Excellence recommendations.17 A societal perspective for costs was adopted for
the sensitivity analysis and this included private costs incurred by trial
participants and their families, and productivity losses and loss of earnings as
a result of work absences. The economic evaluation was a cost-utility analysis,
expressed in terms of incremental Articles See Online for appendix 443 Articles
cost per quality-adjusted life-year (QALY) gained. The time horizon covered the
period from randomisation to end of follow-up at 9 months post injury. Economic
costs associated with the direct delivery of the interventions were estimated
and included costs of the walking boot and wedges, materials used for plaster
casts, and the costs associated with fitting the interventions to patients
(hospital staf time). Resource-use 1451 patients referred to the trauma or
orthopaedic clinic with Achilles tendon rupture 375 patients did not meet
eligibility criteria 3 younger than 16 years 37 previous Achilles tendon rupture
120 receiving surgery 155 presented to treating hospital >14 days after injury
46 unable to adhere to trial procedures or complete questionnaire 14 other
reasons 1076 eligible patients 534 not randomised 97 no staﬀ available to
register patient or patient missed in error 50 choice of clinician 2 walking
boot functional brace or plaster cast supplies unavailable 385 patient declined
540 patients randomised* 266 allocated to plaster cast 274 allocated to
functional brace 1 withdrew 1 withdrew 265 received treatment 247 received
plaster cast 17 received functional brace 13 patient decision 3 clinician
decision 1 incorrect diagnosis 1 unknown 273 received treatment 269 received
functional brace 4 received plaster cast 1 patient decision 1 clinician decision
2 medical resources unavailable 9 excluded from modified ITT analysis 6
withdrew† 3 missing data 4 excluded from modified ITT analysis 2 withdrew‡ 1
missing data 1 death 257 included in modified ITT analysis 270 included in
modified ITT analysis Figure: Trial profile ATRS=Achilles tendon rupture score.
ITT=intention-to-treat. *Two participants were randomised in error without
giving consent to be in the study, and they immediately withdrew as shown; these
participants were excluded from all data analyses. †Includes one patient who
withdrew pre-treatment and five patients who withdrew post- treatment. ‡Includes
one patient who withdrew pre-treatment and one patient with withdrew
post-treatment. 444 questionnaires com­ pleted by participants at each follow-up
timepoint provided a profile of broader NHS and personal social services
resource use. Resource-use values were con­ verted into costs (in GBP, 2017–18
prices) by applying unit costs obtained from key UK national databases.18–20
Further details of costing procedures are provided in the appendix (pp 3–5).
QALY profiles were calculated for each participant using health utility scores
generated from the EQ-5D-5L and assuming linear interpolation between baseline
and follow-up health utility scores. Bivariate regression of costs and QALYs,
with multiple imputation for missing data, was conducted in order to estimate
the incremental cost per QALY gained for functional bracing compared with
plaster cast. Further­ more, the probability of cost- efectiveness of functional
bracing was estimated over a range of cost-efectiveness thresholds: £15 000, £20
000, and £30 000 per QALY gained.17,21 Further details on the methods of the
economic evaluation and the sensitivity analyses done to test the robustness of
cost-efectiveness results are provided in the appendix (pp 5, 6). The trial is
registered with ISRCTN, ISRCTN62639639. Role of the funding source The funders
of the study had no role in study design, data collection, data analysis, data
interpretation, or writing of the report. The corresponding author had full
access to all the data in the study and had final responsibility for the
decision to submit for publication. Results Between Aug 15, 2016, and May 31,
2018, 1451 patients were screened, of whom 540 partici­ pants were randomly
allocated to receive plaster cast (n=266) or functional brace (n=274; figure).
One participant in each group withdrew consent immediately pre-treatment.
Participants had a mean age of 48∙7 years (SD 13·8), were predominantly male
(426 [79%] of 538), and most commonly ruptured their tendon during sports (70%).
The study groups were well balanced on all baseline characteristics (table 1).
13 partici­ pants were excluded from the modified intention-to-treat population,
because they had missing data at baseline (n=4), or withdrew (n=8) or died (n=1)
before providing any outcome data. 527 (98%) participants were included in the
primary outcome analysis. There was no statistically or clinically significant
dif erence in ATRS at 9 months post injury in the plaster cast group (mean ATRS
74∙4 [SD 19∙8]) versus the func­ tional brace group (72∙8 [20∙4]; adjusted mean
diference –1∙38 [95% CI –4∙9 to 2∙1]; table 2). There was no statistically
significant diference in the secondary CACE analysis (adjusted mean diference
–1∙18 (–4∙5 to 2∙1). We found a statistically significant but clinically
equivocal diference in ATRS at 8 weeks post injury in favour of functional brace
(adjusted mean diference 5∙53 [2∙0–9∙1]), but not at 3 months or 6 months post
injury. Health-related quality of life, measured by EQ-5D-5L, www.thelancet.com
Vol 395 February 8, 2020 Plaster cast (n=264) Functional brace (n=274) Overall
(n=538) Gender Female 51 (19%) 61 (22%) 112 (21%) Male 213 (81%) 213 (78%) 426
(79%) Age, years 49·0 (14·0) 48·3 (13·8) 48·7 (13·8) ATRS pre-injury n 264 273
537 Median (IQR) 100·0 (96·5–100·0) 100·0 (94·0–100·0) 100·0 (96·0–100·0) BMI,
kg/m² n 255 265 520 Mean (SD) 27·5 (4·5) 27·8 (5·0) 27·7 (4·8) Days since injury
5·0 (2·5–8·0) 5·0 (2·0–8·0) 5·0 (2·0–8·0) Mechanism of injury Fall from height 3
(1%) 8 (3%) 11 (2%) Fall on steps or stairs 22 (8%) 14 (5%) 36 (7%) Fall or trip
from 6 (2%) 11 (4%) 17 (3%) standing height Pushing an object 18 (7%) 15 (5%) 33
(6%) Sports 187 (71%) 192 (70%) 379 (70%) Walking 14 (5%) 28 (10%) 42 (8%) Other
14 (5%) 6 (2%) 20 (4%) Side of injury Right 122 (46%) 138 (50%) 260 (48%) Left
142 (54%) 136 (50%) 278 (52%) Regular smoker No 225 (85%) 234 (85%) 459 (85%)
Yes 39 (15%) 39 (14%) 78 (14%) Missing 0 1 (<1%) 1 (<1%) Cigarettes per day n 39
39 78 Median (IQR) 10 (5–15) 10 (5–15) 10 (5–15) Smoking duration, years n 38 38
76 Median (IQR) 20·0 (10·0–25·0) 20·5 (13·0–30·0) 20·0 (10·0–30·0) Alcohol units
per week 0–7 162 (61%) 161 (59%) 323 (60%) 8–14 49 (19%) 65 (24%) 114 (21%)
15–21 40 (15%) 35 (13%) 75 (14%) >21 12 (5%) 10 (4%) 22 (4%) Missing 1 (<1%) 3
(1%) 4 (1%) (Table 1 continues in next column) showed the same pattern, with a
statistically significant diference at 8 weeks post injury but not at later
timepoints (appendix p 15). There was no evidence of a diference in the
complication profiles between groups (table 3). 17 (6%) of 266 participants in
the plaster cast group had re-rupture of the tendon, compared with 13 (5%) in
the functional brace group. The mean direct intervention costs were £36 for the
plaster cast group compared with £109 for the functional www.thelancet.com Vol
395 February 8, 2020 Articles Plaster cast (n=264) Functional brace (n=274)
Overall (n=538) (Continued from previous column) Taking medication
Fluoroquinolone antibiotics 5 (2%) 4 (2%) 9 (2%) Steroids 7 (3%) 14 (5%) 21 (4%)
DMARDs 2 (1%) 1 (<1%) 3 (1%) Diabetic medication 5 (2%) 14 (5%) 19 (4%) Regular
analgesia 23 (9%) 14 (5%) 37 (7%) Anticoagulant 66 (25%) 78 (29%) 144 (27%)
medication Diagnosis before injury Diabetes 5 (2%) 18 (7%) 23 (4%) Rheumatoid
arthritis 0 3 (1%) 3 (1%) Lower limb fracture 1 (<1%) 4 (1%) 5 (1%) (past 12
months) Ligament, tendon, or 5 (2%) 8 (3%) 13 (2%) nerve injury to lower limb
(past 12 months) Arthritis 21 (8%) 21 (8%) 42 (8%) Achilles tendinopathy 10 (4%)
10 (4%) 20 (4%) Employment status Full-time employed 160 (61%) 168 (61%) 328
(61%) Part-time employed 18 (7%) 15 (5%) 33 (6%) Self-employed 39 (15%) 29 (11%)
68 (13%) Retired, looking after 35 (13%) 41 (15%) 76 (14%) home, or inactive
Unpaid work 1 (<1%) 2 (1%) 3 (1%) Unemployed 8 (3%) 8 (3%) 16 (3%) Full-time
student 3 (1%) 9 (3%) 12 (2%) Missing 0 2 (1%) 2 (<1%) Employment category
Unskilled manual 11 (4%) 11 (4%) 22 (4%) Skilled manual 62 (23%) 64 (23%) 126
(23%) Unskilled non-manual 6 (2%) 7 (3%) 13 (2%) Skilled non-manual 29 (11%) 21
(8%) 50 (9%) Professional 109 (41%) 108 (39%) 217 (40%) Missing 0 3 (1%) 3 (1%)
Data are n (%) for categorical variables and mean (SD) or median (IQR) for
continuous outcomes unless stated otherwise. ATRS=Achilles tendon rupture score.
BMI=body-mass index. DMARD=disease-modifying antirheumatic drug. Table 1:
Baseline characteristics brace group (mean diference £73 [95% CI 67–79];
p<0·0001). The mean total NHS and personal social services cost throughout the
entire follow-up period for the base case (imputed) analysis was £1181 for the
plaster cast group and £1078 for the functional brace group. Although functional
bracing was slightly cheaper, the mean between-group cost diference of –£103
(95% CI –289 to 84) was not statistically significant. The QALY estimate for the
base case was slightly higher for patients in the functional brace group (0∙015
QALYs [95% CI –0∙001 to 0∙030]) over the 9-month follow-up period. The
incremental cost-efectiveness ratio for the base-case 445 Articles Plaster cast
Functional brace Between-group difference (95% CI) p value n ATRS, mean (SD) n
ATRS, mean (SD) Unadjusted Adjusted* 8 weeks 234 35·3 (20·1) 240 40·3 (17·8)
4·98 (1·3 to 8·7) 5·53 (2·0 to 9·1) 0·0024 3 months 229 44·4 (21·1) 244 45·6
(20·4) 1·23 (–2·5 to 4∙9) 1·76 (–1·8 to 5·3) 0·34 6 months 224 63·9 (21·4) 235
63·5 (23·0) –0·44 (–4·2 to 3∙3) 0·35 (–3·3 to 4·0) 0·85 9 months 244 74·4 (19·8)
259 72·8 (20·4) –1·65 (–5·2 to 1∙9) –1·38 (–4·9 to 2·1) 0·44 The analysis was
based on a mixed effects model with repeated measures from all timepoints.
ATRS=Achilles tendon rupture score. *ATRS analysis adjusted for recruitment
centre, age, gender, and baseline ATRS with repeated observations within
participant. Table 2: ATRS in the modified intention-to-treat population Plaster
cast (n=266) Functional brace (n=274) p value Tendon re-rupture 17 (6%) 13 (5%)
0·40 Deep vein thrombosis 3 (1%) 6 (2%) 0·51 Pulmonary embolism 0 2 (1%) 0·50
Fall with no injury 60 (23%) 53 (19%) 0·36 Fall with injury sustained 21 (8%) 24
(9%) 0·72 Pain under the heel 158 (59%) 180 (66%) 0·13 Numbness around the foot
108 (41%) 130 (47%) 0·11 Pressure sores 39 (15%) 51 (19%) 0·22 Data are number
of participants reporting complication at least once (%). Complications in each
treatment group were summed over the 9-month follow-up. Table 3: Complications
from baseline to 9 months in the intention-to- treat population analysis showed
that functional bracing was the dominant procedure because the functional brace
group incurred slightly lower costs and experienced slightly higher QALYs over
the follow-up period. The probability of cost- efectiveness for func­ tional
bracing was 0·97 at a cost- efectiveness threshold of £20 000 per QALY gained.
This finding remained robust to most sensitivity analyses; the exception was an
assessment of cost-efectiveness from a societal perspective in which the
probability of cost-efectiveness for functional bracing was 0∙58. Further
results of the economic evaluation are provided in the appendix (pp 7–20).
Discussion The findings of this study showed no diference in ATRS at 9 months
between plaster cast and functional bracing for patients treated non-operatively
for a rupture of the Achilles tendon. There was a statistically significant
diference in ATRS at 8 weeks in favour of the functional brace group, although
the clinical significance of this diference is debatable. Any benefit to
functional bracing at 8 weeks was not evident later in recovery, with similar
scores between groups at 3, 6, and 9 months. Health- related quality of life
showed a similar pattern of recovery over time. The diference in EQ-5D-5L
utility score was significant early in the patients’ recovery, but there was no
evidence of a diference at 9 months. 446 The safety profile of the functional
brace was another important consideration of this trial. Specifically, if the
risk of re-rupture of the tendon were higher in patients who were allowed to
fully weight-bear in a functional brace, this would influence the decision to
choose this treatment, even if patient-reported outcomes were similar. We found
that the risk of re-rupture was generally lower than that reported in the
literature,22 with 17 (6%) patients experiencing re-rupture in the plaster cast
group and 13 (5%) in the functional brace group. None of the re-ruptures
occurred more than 6 months after the injury. When UKSTAR was developed, the
scarcity of evidence in this area was recognised in the 2009 American Academy of
Orthopaedic Surgeons guideline,23 which concluded that “For patients treated
non-operatively, we are unable to recommend for or against the use of immediate
func­ tional bracing for patients with acute Achilles tendon rupture.” Since the
start of the UKSTAR trial, a number of small randomised trials have investigated
both the mech­ an­ istic and functional efects of early weight-bearing in a
brace versus cast immo­ bilisation for patients treated non-operatively. One
trial investigated the bio­ mechanical properties of the hea­ ling tendon in
patients randomly allocated to early weight-bearing versus delayed
weight-bearing.24 The inves­ tigators noted that the group treated with early
weight-bearing experienced less tendon stifness. However, in terms of functional
outcomes, the authors reported no evidence of a diference.25 A second trial of
47 participants investigated weight-bearing in patients treated non-operatively
for an acute Achilles tendon rupture. Half of the patients were treated with
partial weight-bearing beginning on the first day of treatment and the other
half with non-weight-bearing for the first 4 weeks. The authors concluded that
early weight-bearing was safe, in terms of the incidence of re-rupture, but they
found no evidence of a diference in functional outcome in the first 12 months
after the rupture.26 Another trial of 84 patients compared two types of cast
immobilisation of the Achilles tendon rupture.27 Half of the patients wore a
traditional cast, which restricted weight-bearing, and the other group wore a
modified cast which included a heel iron to facilitate weight-bearing. The
authors found no evidence of a diference in func­ tional outcome. One further
study, published in 2019,28 randomly allocated 130 patients to cast immo­
bilisation or early controlled motion at a single centre. The authors found no
evidence that early controlled motion was of benefit compared with
immobilisation in any of the investigated outcomes. The strengths of the
pragmatic UKSTAR trial were the use of multiple centres and clinicians
reflecting the care provided across the UK NHS, the large number of participants
with 93% complete follow-up, and the use of validated patient-reported outcomes.
As in all clinical trials, some patients declined to participate. In this trial,
we approached only individuals www.thelancet.com Vol 395 February 8, 2020 who
had already decided against surgical repair. The proportion of people accepting
the invitation to par­ ticipate was high, with most of those declining doing so
because of an unwillingness to participate in research. Therefore, we believe
the results to be generalisable to the population of patients having
non-operative treatment for an acute rupture of the Achilles tendon. A further
anticipated limitation was crossover from the allocated trial treatment.
However, most participants received their allocated treatment with only 21
patients changing their allocated intervention after being randomised. In
addition, some patients had incomplete compliance with treatment. The ability to
bear weight immediately within a functional brace might have motivated patients
to change from plaster cast to functional brace, given that these were most of
the crossovers, rather than the other way around. However, the overall number of
patients not receiving their allocated treatment is small and the CACE analysis,
which was adjusted for incomplete compliance, confirmed the result of the
primary analysis showing no evidence of a diference in ATRS between the two
groups. Loss to follow-up is another potential limitation. However, over 93% of
participants provided primary outcome data at 9 months, which is considerably
higher than the 80% assumed in the trial design. Therefore, given that the trial
also exceeded the minimum sample size, we can be confident that the conclusions
based on the primary outcome are robust and the risk of type II error is low. In
conclusion, this trial provides no evidence that traditional plaster casting is
superior to early weight- bearing in a functional brace as measured by ATRS in
the management of patients treated non-operatively for Achilles tendon rupture.
The use of functional bracing is likely to be cost-efective. The UKSTAR trial
collaborators I Reichert, A McAndrew, A Johnstone, F Harrold, J Madeley, H
Kurup, R Nanda, A Ghosh, S Sampalli, S Kapoor, A Dramis, N Modi, N Hancock, R
Deol, R Walter, J Forder, P Hull, M Westwood, V Mishra, S Burtt, V Lyle, N
Reissis, J Eyre, P Harwood, A Guha, S Madan, A Sott, R Bhattacharya, J Beastall,
J Ballester, A Malik, S El-Kawy, B Karagkevrekis, A Abdallah, A Mahmood, M
Deakin, M Ballal, A Kelly. Contributors MLC, JA, SJD, SEL, BO, SP, and RSK were
responsible for study conception, trial design, obtaining grant funding, and
trial management. MLC and JA were responsible for acquisition of data. IRM and
SJD were responsible for the statistical analysis. MM and SP were responsible
for the health economics analysis. All authors were responsible for the
interpretation of the data and for drafting and approving the final submitted
manuscript. Declaration of interests MLC reports membership of the UK National
Institute for Health Research (NIHR) Health Technology Assessment (HTA) general
board. JA, IRM, SJD, and SP report grants from NIHR. SEL reports membership of
the HTA Additional Capacity Funding Board in 2012–15, HTA Clinical Trials Board
in 2010–15, HTA End of Life Care and Add-on Studies in 2015, HTA Funding Boards
Policy Group (formerly CSG) in 2010–15, HTA Maternal, Neonatal and Child Health
Methods Group in 2013–15, HTA Post-board funding teleconference in 2010–15, HTA
Prioritisation Group in 2012–15, and the NIHR CTU Standing Advisory Committee in
2012–16. RSK reports membership of the UK NIHR HTA Clinical www.thelancet.com
Vol 395 February 8, 2020 Articles Evaluation and Trials board, NIHR Integrated
Clinical Academic Doctoral panel and NIHR Research for Patient Benefit board. BO
and MM declare no competing interests. Data sharing All data requests should be
submitted to the corresponding author for consideration. Access to anonymised
data may be granted following review. Acknowledgments We would like to thank all
those involved in making the UKSTAR trial a success, including the patients and
the research associates at all the research sites, and, in particular, Anna Liew
and Susan Wagland (University of Oxford, Oxford, UK) for their input to trial
coordination and management. References 1 Costa ML, MacMillan K, Halliday D, et
al. Randomised controlled trials of immediate weight-bearing mobilisation for
rupture of the tendo Achillis. J Bone Joint Surg Br 2006; 88: 69–77. 2 Metz R,
Kerkhofs GM, Verleisdonk E-J, van der Heijden GJ. Acute Achilles tendon rupture:
minimally invasive surgery versus non operative treatment, with immediate full
weight bearing. Design of a randomized controlled trial. BMC Musculoskelet
Disord 2007; 8: 108. 3 Willits K, Amendola A, Bryant D, et al. Operative versus
nonoperative treatment of acute Achilles tendon ruptures: a multicenter
randomized trial using accelerated functional rehabilitation. J Bone Joint Surg
Am 2010; 92: 2767–75. 4 Kearney RS, Parsons N, Underwood M, Costa ML. Achilles
tendon rupture rehabilitation: a mixed methods investigation of current practice
among orthopaedic surgeons in the United Kingdom. Bone Joint Res 2015; 4: 65–69.
5 Costa ML, Kay D, Donell ST. Gait abnormalities following rupture of the tendo
Achillis: a pedobarographic assessment. J Bone Joint Surg Br 2005; 87: 1085–88.
6 Healy B, Beasley R, Weatherall M. Venous thromboembolism following prolonged
cast immobilisation for injury to the tendo Achillis. J Bone Joint Surg Br 2010;
92: 646–50. 7 Suchak AA, Spooner C, Reid DC, Jomha NM. Postoperative
rehabilitation protocols for Achilles tendon ruptures: a meta- analysis. Clin
Orthop Relat Res 2006; 445: 216–21. 8 Kearney RS, McGuinness KR, Achten J, Costa
ML. A systematic review of early rehabilitation methods following a rupture of
the Achilles tendon. Physiotherapy 2012; 98: 24–32. 9 Achten J, Parsons NR,
Kearney RL, et al. Cast versus functional brace in the rehabilitation of
patients treated non-operatively for a rupture of the Achilles tendon: protocol
for the UK study of tendo Achilles rehabilitation (UK STAR) multi-centre
randomised trial. BMJ Open 2017; 7: e019628. 10 Marian IR, Costa ML, Dutton SJ.
Cast versus functional brace in the rehabilitation of patients with a rupture of
the Achilles tendon: statistical analysis plan for the UK study of tendo
Achilles rehabilitation (UK STAR) multi-centre randomised controlled trial.
Trials 2019; 20: 311. 11 Kearney RS, Lamb SE, Achten J, Parsons NR, Costa ML.
In-shoe plantar pressures within ankle-foot orthoses: implications for the
management of Achilles tendon ruptures. Am J Sports Med 2011; 39: 2679–85. 12
Nilsson-Helander K, Thomeé R, Silbernagel KG, et al. The Achilles tendon Total
Rupture Score (ATRS): development and validation. Am J Sports Med 2007; 35:
421–26. 13 van Hout B, Janssen MF, Feng Y-S, et al. Interim scoring for the
EQ-5D-5L: mapping the EQ-5D-5L to EQ-5D-3L value sets. Value Health 2012; 15:
708–15. 14 Kearney RS, Achten J, Lamb SE, Parsons N, Costa ML. The Achilles
tendon total rupture score: a study of responsiveness, internal consistency and
convergent validity on patients with acute Achilles tendon ruptures. Health Qual
Life Outcomes 2012; 10: 24. 15 Kearney RS, Achten J, Parsons NR, Costa ML. The
comprehensive cohort model in a pilot trial in orthopaedic trauma. BMC Med Res
Methodol 2011; 11: 39. 16 Dunn G, Maracy M, Tomenson B. Estimating treatment
efects from randomized clinical trials with noncompliance and loss to follow-up:
the role of instrumental variable methods. Stat Methods Med Res 2005; 14:
369–95. 447 Articles 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 448 National Institute for Health and
Care Excellence. Guide to the methods of technology appraisal, 2013. London:
National Institute for Health and Care Excellence, 2013. Curtis L, Burns A. Unit
costs of health & social care 2018. Canterbury: Personal Social Services
Research Unit, University of Kent, 2018. National Health Service. NHS Supply
Chain: online catalogue. 2018. https://my.supplychain.nhs.uk/catalogue (accessed
18 July 2018). Health and Care Social Information Centre (NHS Digital).
Prescription cost analysis: England 2017 . London: Health and Care Social
Information Centre, 2018. Claxton K, Martin S, Soares M, et al. Methods for the
estimation of the National Institute for Health and Care Excellence cost-
efectiveness threshold. Health Technol Assess 2015; 19: 1–503, v–vi. Khan RJ,
Fick D, Brammar TJ, Crawford J, Parker MJ. Interventions for treating acute
Achilles tendon ruptures. Cochrane Database Syst Rev 2004; 3: CD003674. American
Academy of Orthopaedic Surgeons. The diagnosis and treatment of acute Achilles
tendon rupture: guideline and evidence report. Rosemont, IL: American Academy of
Orthopaedic Surgeons, 2009. 24 25 26 27 28 Barfod KW, Bencke J, Lauridsen HB,
Dippmann C, Ebskov L, Troelsen A. Nonoperative, dynamic treatment of acute
Achilles tendon rupture: influence of early weightbearing on biomechanical
properties of the plantar flexor muscle-tendon complex: a blinded, randomized,
controlled trial. J Foot Ankle Surg 2015; 54: 220–26. Barfod KW, Bencke J,
Lauridsen HB, Ban I, Ebskov L, Troelsen A. Nonoperative dynamic treatment of
acute Achilles tendon rupture: the influence of early weight-bearing on clinical
outcome: a blinded, randomized controlled trial. J Bone Joint Surg Am 2014; 96:
1497–503. Korkmaz M, Erkoc MF, Yolcu S, Balbaloglu O, Öztemur Z, Karaaslan F.
Weight bearing the same day versus non-weight bearing for 4 weeks in Achilles
tendon rupture. J Orthop Sci 2015; 20: 513–16. Young SW, Patel A, Zhu M, et al.
Weight-bearing in the nonoperative treatment of acute Achilles tendon ruptures:
a randomized controlled trial. J Bone Joint Surg Am 2014; 96: 1073–79. Barfod
KW, Hansen MS, HÖlmich P, Kristensen MT, Troelsen A. Efficacy of early
controlled motion of the ankle compared with immobilisation in non-operative
treatment of patients with an acute Achilles tendon rupture: an
assessor-blinded, randomised controlled trial. Br J Sports Med 2019; published
online Oct 9. DOI:10.1136/bjsports-2019-100709.
